---
title: "Behind the NYT Bestseller Lists"
date: "2019-06-17"
---

Last week’s project revealed to me that the majority of my unread books were purchased out of guilt. For some reason, I believed that I was _supposed_ to read a particular title and that perhaps not doing so was a moral flaw. So, for my final project, I am researching one of the biggest deciders of what Americans view as worth reading: the _New York Times_ best seller lists. I’ve entered into the research with a host of questions. Do a handful of publishers run the table or is it an open field? Do the top selling authors reflect who we are as a nation? What other factors might propel a book to prominence?

These visualizations are aimed both at those who revere and revile the list—those who unthinkingly let it guide them and those who dismiss its potential power to tell us about the industry and our decision making. The investigation is also geared at those who have been eager to see change in the publishing industry. With diverse authors such as Jhumpa Lahiri and Yaa Gyasi making headlines over the course of this decade, it’s easy to believe that the publishing world has opened up in ways that might better reflect the spectrum of American citizenry. These visualizations may help quantify the degree to which that is true or not.

So far, most of my work has been in fixing the data which, while at first glance only mildly prickly in JSON format, has loads of parsing errors, from differentiating JRR Tolkein from J R R Tolkein and the typo allantine as a separate imprint from Ballantine to larger issues of not connecting publishing houses to their parent companies and looking at pseudonyms as distinct writers. My first two visualization aim to depict how radically skewed such a data set can be. The first is a simple bar graph representing the publishing houses with the most weeks on the list. The visualization suggests that a handful of houses rule the roost, but that a vast array of smaller contenders still get their works considered. Within the bars are blocks representing the specific authors to show how one or two huge names can radically affect a publisher’s standings. The second bar graph represents how many of the presses represented in the first graph are actually part of the same parent company, with a staggering third belonging to Penguin Random House alone. This graph will be all the more powerful when the data set can be structured to show the proportion of weeks on the list held by the conglomerates.

The third graph I’ve managed for this week depicts the share of authors represented over the decade—intriguing in and of its own right, as some books, such as Kathryn Stockett’s _The Help_ gobbles up 114 weeks, roughly the same visual real estate as Stuart Woods’ 35 books making the list over the course of the ten years. But, a deeper look through the tool tips exposes the wealth of data set problems, as James Patterson’s co-authored books all get grouped separately instead of accurately representing the hegemony he has over American readership.

 

https://public.tableau.com/views/NYT\_15608028028630/Story1?:embed=y&:display\_count=yes&publish=yes&:origin=viz\_share\_link

These issues beg to be represented in complex and powerful ways. In these preliminary graphs, I have striven for simplicity first in order to lead me to the potential questions that require additional data. I chose a horizontal bar chart for the publishing house graphs in order to show how literally far some presses are outstripping others. I included color variation within the first to depict the proportion of those weeks dedicated to a few authors who dominate the list. I purposefully removed the color in the graph depicting the membership of parent companies to represent the entities themselves—separate houses that share influences and management under one larger group. Finally, I chose a tree chart to represent the author’s share of the list, not only because I wanted to see proportion visually, but because tree charts with granularity look a bit like bookshelf clutters.

I have created by hand a data set of the 735 authors listed in this one, and have rectified the myriad flaws within. I am also working on compiling details about gender and ethnicity. I also need to work on handling the JSON data, with its funky numbers, dates, and formats. With more accurate and richer data, I hope to build more visually rich and unusual depiction of the forces behind the _Times_ list.
